
## A Critical Essay on Debt in America mapping project by the Urban Institute

Maps are powerful tools in conveying information that might be easy glossed over. A well constructed map has the ability to highlight the mundane, and impact the viewer in ways that they were not aware of. Add in the growing technological advances in recent years that have brought maps into the digital age, and suddenly cartographers have many tools at their disposal to craft a map that says exactly what they desire, while simultaneously displaying information in a myriad of ways through the use of data dashboards. The simplicity of many map making tools in the current age means that the bar for accessibility has been reduced, and now people can learn to make well constructed maps by utilizing crowdsourced knowledge and technology. The accessibility of these tools is part of what makes digital maps such a powerful and impactful tool for clients attempting to drive home even the most mundane of messages.
A great example of the way that digital technologies can elevate a map is the interactive web map and dashboard, [] Debt in America, published by the [] Urban Institute and created by a group of researchers, artists, developers, and editors. Oftentimes, debt is not something that many Americans want to talk about, so presenting a large amount of the systemic inequalities of debt held by Americans has to be done in an engaging way. I know that personally, if this project had been reduced to just an article, I would have undoubtedly skimmed past it and learned nothing. Instead, the project is presented in the form of an interactive web map, accompanied by informational sidebars and responsive bar graphs. However, in my mind, the best part of the map is the implementation of interactive elements at multiple zoom levels, featuring interactive tiles at both the state and county levels. At the national level, each state is bound to a tile that populates the bar graphs at the top of the screen as the user hovers over each state. Clicking the tiles at the state level zooms the user in to view the counties in the state, populating the bar graphs above the map through the same hover on popup event that is used at the state level. Additionally, the informational bar on the left hand side of the web map features clickable statistics that change the map to a preset filter, such as delinquency rates or race. These presets also work at both the state and county levels of the map. Throughout all of its components, it is clear that professional work was put into this project, and that much time was devoted to fine tuning.
One of the largest contributions on the team seems to come from Signe-Mary McKernan, who was both partially responsible for research the project, as well as partially credited with envisioning the project, along with Caroline Racliffe. According to her Urban Institute profile, Signe-Mary McKernan is the vice president for labor, human services, and population, and the co-director of the Opportunity and Ownership initiative at the Urban Institute. However, while McKernan is a highly published researcher and accomplished advocate in her field, her work is not what is attracting people to this project, in fact it is the other way around. The work of the design and development team of George Railean, Christina Baird, Vivian Hou, Daniel Wood, and JoElla Carman, is what enables this project to gain the attention of readers and gives McKernan’s work a venue to be more widely accessible. This greater accessibility allows the project to reach a wider audience, so although this project was certainly meant to be seen by the lawmakers, non-profits, advocacy groups, academics, and philanthropists that are the usual audience to much of the Urban Institutes work, the greater accessibility provided by the integration into the form of a web map allows for the general public to also easily digest the message.
Another reason to appreciate this project is that the developers made sure to upload the entire project to a github [] repository, allowing us to much more easily see what is going on under the hood, and how the developers were able to make such a great application. However, first we should examine some of the systematic architecture that frames the project. On the client side is the web map application client, where the webmap is hosted on the Urban Institute's website. One interesting thing to note is that for some reason the urban.org [] address did not return a known server upon command prompt inquiry, instead returning the field [] ‘UnKnown’. However from this point on the code and data seems to all be stored on github and sourced by the web servers and geospatial servers from that point. The data for the map comes from a variety of sources, including random samples of consumer level credit records, and American Community Survey estimates. Additionally, creators of the map specified the methods that they used to categorize their data for several different data variables, including categorizations of race, past due credit collections, and multiple bank loan types. Furthermore, the map data breaks are also specified as having been identified via the Jenks Natural Breaks method. In an attempt to provide the fullest transparency possible, the creators even provide a link to a five page ‘technical appendix’ to the webpage, that covers many of methods used to obtain and identify datasets. However, from the perspective of our critique of the web map application itself, the most open and transparent measure of all, is the decision to host the code on github, and then providing the link to the repository on the application web page itself.
A closer look at the code hosted on the Urban Institute’s github repository shows us that the script code is all referenced within the [] index.html file and stored under the document hierarchy in the repository within the [] js file. A perusal of the [] index.html file also revealed that the several libraries were in use, including several instances of jquery. As a lightweight javascript library, the use of jQuery makes sense here, especially given that it is being used here for web page and web map application development, where there is a lot of code already. Additional scripts that are referenced in the index.html [] also include a javascript topojson file, which would indicate the use of json for the spatial mapping piece of the project.
Another helpful portion of the code shows us that the web page has been written in a way that supports responsive design, as we see here the first evidence of this is the early code references to separate id for each user type [] []. However, although the code does feature this responsive design that allows for mobile users to have access to a curated version of the web page, it is [] highly [] limited. The mobile version of the webpage does not allow access to any of the web mapping or dashboard applications, instead limiting the user to just the dropdown menus and corresponding bar graphs [][][]. This is somewhat of a disappointment from an accessibility standpoint, and certainly does nothing to bridge the digital divide of people with full size monitors and the many Americans whose main access point to the internet i s via a smartphone, but it also seems understandable to not feature this massive application on the mobile side. Especially when so much of the data is still accessible from the dropdown menu format, albeit with a much less aesthetically appealing delivery.
Moving onto the data behind the map, we can see that the data is also stored in the github repository. Each map version has its own corresponding csv file, hosted within the github repository’s document hierarchy. Using the Auto_loan-county csv file as an example, we see that the data is listed by county, state, and county fips id, along with several variables for each county. [] [] [] [] []
This data is obviously being represented in a variety of ways, both in the web mapping application, as well as the dashboard sidebar and bar graphs. However, despite the array of information, the amount of data does not overwhelm the user. In fact, even when the user is zoomed in at the state level the map and dashboard combine to give the user a wide view of the data by populating the county data on mouse over while simultaneously showing the corresponding variable at the state and national level []. If anything, I would say that the use of the automatic zoom levels, allows for users to have a better sense of regional cohesion between datasets, as no county can be seen without also viewing all of the other counties in the state. However, one aspect of the user interface that is slightly confusing is the placement of the selector button to change which dataset the viewer is interacting with. [] These tabs almost seem to be part of the Urban Institute webpage design and don’t immediately jump out at the user, which may cause the user to entirely miss out on viewing the individual datasets. This is not a huge issue, but it could potentially have been improved to highlight the presence of additional data.
Part of what makes this map so attractive and easy to read is the use of its simple, yet pleasing color palette and symbology. The use of a single color coding scheme makes the choropleth easy to decipher even for the layperson. The web map also is presented without the presence of a basemap, with the interactive tiles layered over a featureless white background. Yet, because this map is presented, at least at the start, as a map of the United States, the study area is widely enough recognized that a basemap would do nothing but provide distraction or interfere with the choropleth tiles. Moreover, because this map's focus is on the [] human geography [] within the represented borders, a basemap for spatial recognition is not really necessary, so in the end I support this decision wholeheartedly. It is also worth mentioning that there is no presence of a scale bar or north arrow, however the presence of a simple legend is much appreciated.
 Overall, I feel that this digital geography project is a prime example of a well implemented digital geography project that delivers the messages of the author in a much more accessible and exciting way. Although there are certainly aspects that could be improved, such as the accessibility of the web mapping piece on mobile devices, this application manages to deliver an enormous amount of data to the viewer without being confusing or overwhelming. I would almost instantly point to this project if asked for an ideal interactive web mapping model.
